<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>‚ÄúLet me shake myself first, daddy,‚Äù said Arkady, in a voice tired from travelling, but boyish and clear as a bell, as he gaily responded to his father‚Äôs caresses; ‚ÄúI am covering you with dust.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever mind, never mind,‚Äù repeated Nikolai Petrovitch, smiling tenderly, and twice he struck the collar of his son‚Äôs cloak and his own greatcoat with his hand. ‚ÄúLet me have a look at you; let me have a look at you,‚Äù he added, moving back from him, but immediately he went with hurried steps towards the yard of the station, calling, ‚ÄúThis way, this way; and horses at once.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Nikolai Petrovitch seemed far more excited than his son; he seemed a little confused, a little timid. Arkady stopped him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDaddy,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúlet me introduce you to my great friend, Bazarov, about whom I have so often written to you. He has been so good as to promise to stay with us.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Nikolai Petrovitch went back quickly, and going up to a tall man in a long, loose, rough coat with tassels, who had only just got out of the carriage, he warmly pressed the ungloved red hand, which the latter did not at once hold out to him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am heartily glad,‚Äù he began, ‚Äúand very grateful for your kind intention of visiting us.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Let me know your name, and your father‚Äôs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYevgeny Vassilyev,‚Äù answered Bazarov, in a lazy but manly voice; and turning back the collar of his rough coat, he showed Nikolai Petrovitch his whole face. It was long and lean, with a broad forehead, a nose flat at the base and sharper at the end, large greenish eyes, and drooping whiskers of a sandy colour; it was lighted up by a tranquil smile, and showed self-confidence and intelligence.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI hope, dear Yevgeny Vassilyitch, you won‚Äôt be dull with us,‚Äù continued Nikolai Petrovitch.</p>
			<p>Bazarov‚Äôs thin lips moved just perceptibly, though he made no reply, but merely took off his cap. His long, thick hair did not hide the prominent bumps on his head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen, Arkady,‚Äù Nikolai Petrovitch began again, turning to his son, ‚Äúshall the horses be put to at once? or would you like to rest?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe will rest at home, daddy; tell them to harness the horses.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAt once, at once,‚Äù his father assented. ‚ÄúHey, Piotr, do you hear? Get things ready, my good boy; look sharp.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Piotr, who as a modernised servant had not kissed the young master‚Äôs hand, but only bowed to him from a distance, again vanished through the gateway.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI came here with the carriage, but there are three horses for your coach too,‚Äù said Nikolai Petrovitch fussily, while Arkady drank some water from an iron dipper brought him by the woman in charge of the station, and Bazarov began smoking a pipe and went up to the driver, who was taking out the horses; ‚Äúthere are only two seats in the carriage, and I don‚Äôt know how your friend‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe will go in the coach,‚Äù interposed Arkady in an undertone. ‚ÄúYou must not stand on ceremony with him, please. He‚Äôs a splendid fellow, so simple‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou will see.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Nikolai Petrovitch‚Äôs coachman brought the horses round.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome, hurry up, bushy beard!‚Äù said Bazarov, addressing the driver.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you hear, Mityuha,‚Äù put in another driver, standing by with his hands thrust behind him into the opening of his sheepskin coat, ‚Äúwhat the gentleman called you? It‚Äôs a bushy beard you are too.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mityuha only gave a jog to his hat and pulled the reins off the heated shaft-horse.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook sharp, look sharp, lads, lend a hand,‚Äù cried Nikolai Petrovitch; ‚Äúthere‚Äôll be something to drink our health with!‚Äù</p>
			<p>In a few minutes the horses were harnessed; the father and son were installed in the carriage; Piotr climbed up on to the box; Bazarov jumped into the coach, and nestled his head down into the leather cushion; and both the vehicles rolled away.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
